Hey there. How's it going everybody in this video?
We'll be learning about python Data types and specifically
We'll be learning about how to work with textual data and textual data in python are represented with strings
So we currently have [opened] our intro pi file that we were working with in the last video
Where we just printed out hello world and I'll go ahead and run this so that we can see that down here
It does print out hello [world] [now]
This line here is using the print function
and we're passing this text value into that print function now if we wanted to create a
Variable that holds that text value then we could say now
I'll just get rid of this comment for now
So if I wanted a variable to hold that value then I can just create a variable and we'll call that
message and we'll set that message variable equal to our text value that we passed in to print and
Here message is our variable [name]
so if you're coming from another [language]
Then you might be wondering if we need [to] use semicolons or something like that to end each line but python doesn't need that it
operates on Whitespace alone
Which makes it a very clean language to work with?
Now by convention our variables are usually all lowercase and if it's multiple words then we separate those with underscore
So if instead my variable name was my message, then it would be my underscore message
So that's just a convention that's commonly used and also these variable names should be as descriptive as possible
As to what values they're meant to hold so message is a good variable name here because it's holding our message
But if I was instead to call this variable m which is a valid variable name
But anyone reading my code now wouldn't know when they see this in variable
What value it's supposed to hold so message is a much better variable name in this case
So this message variable now holds our text data and our text data is called a string now
We can use our variable in place of this string
Anywhere that we use it in our program, so instead [of] printing out hello world
Directly here. I'm instead going to now print out this variable and that should give us the same results
So if I run that then you can see down here, we still get [the] same result now
We can see that
I created this string with single quotes now you can also use double quotes
so if you're wondering if there is a difference between the single quotes in the double quotes
And it really just depends on what text you have in your string
So for example if you have a single quote in your string
So for example let's create one with a single quote instead of hello world, [I] will instead make our string
Bobby's World
Now see the problem [here] is that?
Python sees this single quote within our text as being the end of the string and it's not going to know what to do
With what comes after that single quote here because it thinks that's where the string is closing
So if you run this now then you'll get an error now
There's a couple of different ways to [handle] this we could escape this single quote with a backslash
so if I escape that single quote and now
Run this now python knows that this single quote doesn't close out the string and that instead this one should
Now another way to handle that is [to] instead
So I'll take away that xscape character now another way to handle that is instead
Just use double quotes on the outside of our string any string [that] contains single quotes
So if we know that our string contains a single quote then we can instead use double quotes on the outside
And then it'll know that that single quote isn't the end of the string so now if we run this then we can see that
It still works fine
But that doesn't necessarily mean that double quotes are better because it goes both ways if your string contains double quotes in the message then
I would use single quotes on the outside now if we needed to create a
multi-line string and one way we can do this is by using three quotes at the beginning and end of our string and
these can also be
Single or double quotes as [well], so let's go ahead and look at an example
So I'll add three quotes to the beginning and end of our string here
And now I'll just add [some] text to spans multiple Lines here
so I'll just say was a good and then hit enter to go to a new line and say cartoon in the
1990s so now if we run [that] and we can see that it printed out [our] string correctly over multiple lines, [okay]?
So let's go back to our simple hello world example
So I'm just going to take all of that and replace it with our previous
Hello world example, and now let's go ahead and just run that really quick
So we're back to our starting point so we can think of our string as a string of individual characters
And we can access these individual characters also, so first let's see how we can find how many characters are in our string
So to do this we can use the [len] function which stands for length
So whenever I print out here if I was instead of printing my message if I was to print out this
Length function and pass in message, and then run this. Now we're no longer printing out our message
We're printing out the length of our message
And we can see that it says that the length of our string is 11
And if we counted these up 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Then we can see that that's correct, and we can access our strings characters individually, so to do this we can use the square
Brackets after our string and pass in the location of the character that we want. So, I'll say print
Message and then square brackets now the location is called an index and it starts out at 0
So to access the first character of our string we can say
print the message and then access this index of 0 so if we print that then we can see that we got the
capital H now
since the length of our string is 11 that means that with the first character starting out at 0 our last character would be at
Index 10 so it's our total length minus 1 so if I was to say print out the
Location at Index 10 the value at Index 10 then we can see that we got our d character
Which is the last character in that string.
Now if you accidentally try to access an index that doesn't exist then you'll get an index error. So if we were to say
Access the index of 11, and we can see that that through an index error now
We can also access a range of characters
So if I just wanted to get the word hello from our string then we could say that we want
0 and then this colon 5 and we'll explain this
So the first index here is our starting point and the second in that index which is separated by this colon is
The stopping point now one thing a little confusing about this is that the first index is
Inclusive which means it's going to include that value, but the second index is not now
There's good reasons for this
But it's still easy to forget so basically what we're saying is I want all the characters
Between the beginning and up to but not including the fifth index
And it will be more clear if we just go ahead and run this so we can see that it prints out. Hello
So it printed out our message from the zero index here all the way up to but not including
The [5th] Index here, so we got hello now since our starting point. Here is just [the] first index
We can actually just leave that off and it will assume that we want to start at the beginning
So if we don't put anything there and then : [five] then we should get the same thing
So if we run [that] we can see we still got hello
now instead if we wanted to grab the word world from the string then we could start at
The sixth Index and then we can just go to the end and just like leaving off our
Starting index it will start from the beginning
Leaving off the stop index just goes all the way to the end
So now if we run that and we can see that it gives us back the word world now what we're doing
Here is called slicing and if you'd like to learn more about
Slicing in depth then you can watch my detailed video on that and I'll leave a link to [that] in the [description] section below
So now let's just go back to printing out our message and let me run this okay
So all of the data types that we're going to review are going to have certain methods available to us that give us access to
a lot of useful functionality now when I say methods a lot of people wonder what's the difference between a method and a function and
functions and methods are basically the same thing [a]
Method is just a function that belongs to an object
It's not important to get into the details of that now
But if you hear me say method or function then you can basically think of those as the same thing for now
So like I was saying the data types that we'll be going over all have certain methods
Available to us that give us access to a lot of useful functionality so let's look at some of these string methods
So we can see here that our hello world text is
Capitalized, but let's say [that] we wanted that to be all lowercase now to do this
It's just as easy as saying print message and then to lowercase this we can say dot lower
Now when we run this dot lower with these parentheses here. That's running the lower method on the string
So when we ran that we can see that now our hello world has been set to all lowercase [and] [if] we wanted to do
this to uppercase and it's as easy as changing at
Lower to upper if we run that now we can see that
Hello
World is all uppercase?
So now let's say that we want to count a certain number of characters in our string and to do that
We can use the count method and the count method actually takes a string as an argument so we can say
Message dot count and now we have to pass in an argument
And it has to know what we want to count in our message
So what for now?
We'll [just] say count hello
And if we run that we can see that it returns that the string hello appears in our message one time
But if we instead just passed in a single character as argument
So I'll pass in an L if I run that
You can see that we get a 3 because there are three L's and our message variable
So if we instead want to find the index of where certain characters can be found and we can use the find method so I?
Could come up here instead of saying dot count I can say not fine and now this takes an argument as well
It's what we want to find so let me type in world here and run this
And we can see when [we] run this that it returns a six
and that's because world starts at the sixth index of our message variable now if we try to
Find a string of characters that doesn't exist then it will just return negative one
so if instead of world
I typed in universe and ran that you can see it returns a negative one because it can't find that anywhere in our message variable
Okay, so now let's say that we want to replace some characters in our string with some other characters
And we can do this with the replace method now first. I'm going to change this change this back to printing out our
regular message
[so] I'll just delete these
Now let's try to use our replace method right below where we first set our message fair herbal and this method takes two arguments
First it takes what we want to replace so first let me just say message
But replace so first it takes what we want to replace, so let's say that we want to replace
world and now the second argument
Which is separated by a comma [is] what we want to replace world with so we'll replace world with universe
So now if [we] run this and this might be a little unexpected we can see that it's still printing out hello world
[now] the reason our replacement didn't work is because it's not making that replacement in place
It's actually returning a new string with those values replaced and we'll learn more about return statements when we learn about
Functions, but basically we need to set a new variable here
To get that returned string with those replacements, so I could say something like new message is
equal to
That original method with this replacement
So now if we set that
New variable and instead print that new message and run that and you can see that now it replaced the world with
universe
and if you really wanted to make the
Replacement to the message variable then instead of making a new message variable and we can just set this same message
Variable again, so now we're setting the same message variable equal to that replacement and then printing it out
So if I run that and we can see that now the message variable had world
Replaced with universe and this may look a little strange [to] set a variable to an altered [version] of itself
But it's very common, and you'll be using that a lot
Okay, so now let's get rid of this replace line here
And now let's look at how we can add multiple strings and concatenate them together, so instead of saying hello world
I'm instead just going to set this equal to hello and
Instead of calling this message. I'm going to set this equal to greeting and just below greeting
I'm going to create a variable called name and I'm going [to] set that equal to we'll just say
Michael and now lastly let's create a message here and
We want this message to combine our greeting with our name
Wanted to say hello Michael and one way to do this is to use the plus sign operator
so
We could try this by saying greeting plus name now if we run this and we can see that
It's not exactly what we wanted it combined them together, but it doesn't have a space there
So when you're concatenated strings together it's easy to make mistakes like this
So what we want to do is add a string between them so that spaces them out so we can add a string between these
Just by putting in a string literal here
And I'm also going to put in a comma and a space to separate those and now we also need another plus sign
So that we're adding the name after that string so now we're saying that we want this greeting. Which is hello
plus this comma and space plus the name so if I run this
Then we can see that it concatenated those strings together
How we wanted now sometimes using the plus sign isn't the best way to go if we wanted to create a longer more?
Complicated string while using our variables and adding them all together like this
Might get hard to keep track [of] so let's say that we wanted to add to the end of our message
Just by you know closing off a sentence and saying
Welcome so to do that after our name variable
we could add another string that is a period to close off that sentence a space and then
Welcome with an exclamation point so let's go ahead and run that now we can see that it printed out the string
How we wanted it to look?
But it's starting to get a little complicated on this line here to keep track of all of our plus signs and spaces within our
message
instead with strings like this
It's usually better to use a formatted string
[this] allows [us] to write the sentence as it will appear and put placeholders in place of our variables
So let's go ahead and see what this would look like so though instead use a formatted string
We can say message is equal to and we're just going to write it exactly how it appears
Except everywhere where we want to
Replace with a variable we're going to put in a placeholder and those placeholders are going to be these curly brackets
so we want a placeholder for the greeting and then a comma a space and a placeholder for the name [and] a period and then
[we'll] type out welcome and an exclamation point and now to fill those placeholders with our variables
We can say dot
format
And pass in greeting for the first placeholder and [then] name for the second place holder
So now let's go ahead and delete this line where we where we were using the plus sign
Operator so if we run this we can see that
We got the same [thing] as when we concatenate and then together but with longer more complicated strings
This is actually a little bit easier to read it might look a little confusing now
Since we're just seeing these placeholders for the first time but after you get used to this you will realize that this is
Easier than keeping track [of] all those concatenations and using [stream] formatting like this also gives us some extra
Functionality and if you want to see everything [that] you can do with that and I do have a detailed in-depth video on string
Formatting and I'll add that to the description section below
Ok and lastly if you're using python
3.6 or above then you'll have access to these new things called f strings now if you aren't using
[3.6] or higher then these aren't going to work because they were only
Recently released and not a lot of people are using these f strings yet
But I'm really liking them so far
Basically the idea behind f strings was to make string formatting as simple as possible
So let's go ahead and see what these look like so to say that [we] want this to [be] an f string
We can just add an f right here to the beginning on the outside of the string
now instead of using this dot format method well instead just write the variables directly within the
placeholders so [I] can remove that dot format method and now we can pass the
variables directly within the placeholder
So we'll pass
Greeting to that
Placeholder and name to that one so I can save that and run it and you can see that using that we got the same
Result [and] like I said these f strings are pretty new to the language so even people who are very familiar with python
May be seeing this for the first time now one reason
I really like these f strings is because you can actually write code within the placeholder
So if I wanted the name and all caps for some reason then I could just come [into] the placeholder [here]
And say name dot upper and run that directly within the placeholder if I run that
Then you can see that now our name was capitalized, okay?
So we're almost finished up
But I wanted to show you one last trick here when you're learning something new in python
So [we] saw a lot [of] different methods that we could use on our strings now if we ever wanted to see everything
That's available to us then there are a couple of things that we can do so first we can use this
dir function and that looks like this and
what this does is if we pass in A
Variable then it will show us all of the attributes and methods that we have access [to] with [that] variable now
Don't worry about all of these double underscore methods yet, but if we look down here
Then we'll see a couple of familiar methods that we used in this video
[so] for example we have dot upper here we have
not replace
dot lower
So this kind of gives you a broad overview of all the attributes and methods that are [available] to you now
This doesn't show what any of these actually do so to see more information about these string methods
Then we can use the help function
But if we run this help function on the name then that won't work we actually need to run it on the string class
Itself so we'll just type in help and then
Str for string and if I run that and we can see that this gives us a lot more [information]
And I'll pull this up here a bit
so it
You know tells us everything that's available to us, and if I scroll down here [a] bit
And if I try to find something that we actually used in this video okay, so we have fine here
So you can see that actually gives us a description of what these methods do and what arguments they take
Now if you know that you had a certain method available to you
But you couldn't remember exactly what it does then you can actually pass it directly in to help also, so if I wanted to
Find out some more information about the lower method then we could say string dot
Lower and if we run that and we can see that it gives us information and the description just of what lower does
so using that dir function
and that help function is a great way to get a broad overview of the methods and attributes that [are] available to you and
Also, what using the help function gives you an idea of what those?
Methods do without actually you know going online and checking everything there, okay?
So I think that is going to do it for this video
I hope that now you feel comfortable with
Working with strings and are familiar [with] some of the useful things that we can do with those in the next video
We're learning how to work with numbers in python and specifically integers and floats
But if anyone has any [questions] about what we covered in this video
Then feel free to ask in the comment section below and I'll do my [best] to answer those if you enjoy these tutorials and would
Like to support them then there are several ways [you] can do that
The easiest ways to simply like the video and give it a thumbs up and also
it's a huge help to share these videos with
Anyone you think would find them useful and if you have the means you can contribute through patreon
And there's a link to that page in the description section below be sure to subscribe for future videos and thank you all for watching
you